For many years? Yes, she has been living in Austin
for about 15 or 20 years. Does she have a husband in
Austin? No, she is alone. She is living with a son
who lives in Austin.
She has a son and a granddaughter. Y una hija que
vivía en Austin pero ya se fue. Se cambiaron para
Mirla. Sí. Y tengo otra hermana que vive en Lobo.
¿Sí? ¿Otra? Ella tiene como 20 años de vida.
Y son todos los hermanos que tengo. Y todos sus
hermanos vivían aquí en los Estados Unidos. Sí.
Sí. Ahorita tengo nomás tres hermanos vivos. Sí.
And his mother lived here, but his father died in
Mexico. Yes, she died here. He died many years
before his family came here to Texas, right? I
understand. His father. Oh, yes, yes. Many years.
Yes, well, my mother used to talk I was 4 years old
when he died. Where
did he die? He died here in General Treviño. I was
talking to my mother
that he was dead. What was his age? I think he was
sick. I think they didn't have a lot of money to get a
doctor or a hospital.
Life was difficult in those days. It was difficult
for the people who lived there. I think it's still
very difficult for many people.
For example, when you have a sick person, well... I
don't know, but... I think there are many very poor
people who... who can barely afford to eat during
the day. Yes, and Mexico? I think so. Now? Now. But
here, are there people who live here who don't have
enough to eat? Here, yes. Here, the people who
don't have enough to eat are the ones who don't want
to work. Because there is a lot of work anywhere.
Here. And the people who don't have enough to eat
are the ones who don't want to work.
But in Mexico? No, in Mexico it's different. It's
cheaper. It's possible to... It's very
expensive, everything.
Yes. But it's edible. Yes. The food. And here it's
also expensive, well, but... The people who are
hungry... It's because either the wife or the
children don't want to work. Yes. Because here
there is a lot of work for any person, be it a man or a
woman. Right now it's a bit expensive here, but as
it were, you can eat.
Is the opportunity for education good here? Of
course, yes. Is it good in Mexico? Yes, it is good.
People who have money to continue their studies,
it's good. Poor people can't go to school or finish
school
because they are very poor. The father has to get
the children out of school so that they can go to
work, so that he can help them to maintain all the
families. And there are many. Yes. And there are
many families. Yes. Well, it's a problem here too.
Yes, here too, yes. Yes. Yes, but here they have a
much better chance. Yes? Yes. A much better
chance. Yes, a chance for... para acabar con sus
estudios.
¿Conoce otros parques de los Estados Unidos?
No. ¿Nunca trabajó en el norte? No, there are only
wolves pecking at the cotton once or twice. Only in
Lubbock? Only. But some people here go to... Oh
yes, they go to California and other states. Yes?
No, only here. Why don't you go to these other
parts? I don't like to go there and there and there.
I'm working here. I'm working very well here. Yes.
Because here I am working with these ladies. Here I
work as if it were mine. All over the place. Yes.
It's a good job here. Because I... I leave here in
the morning with my little truck. I'm going to do
whatever I want, as if it were mine. If they need me,
They talk to me. If they have another job, they do
it. Yes. But I don't come to ask them in the mornings
here, what job
am I going to do now? No. But I go out there, I do
anything there. There is a country to break there.
I compose it. The water, the gas, whatever. Yes.
And I've had this job for many years,
I think. From the plumbing. It's a house for you, a
house of
many years, yes. Well, your wife was from a ranch
near here, correct? Yes. And she was born in Mexico
or in Mexico as well? Yes, she was born in Mexico.
When did she come
to the United States? Her father
talked to her. She came around 1916, I think. 1916
and what? 16. 16. Two years before her family.
Where in Mexico?
Zacatecas. Zacatecas. It's very far. Zacatecas.
And for what reason? Well, I think the reason is
that they came to look for life to have a better
time, I think. Yes. They are poor people. They are
poor people from Zacatecas. From the city of
Zacatecas, or a ranch in the state. I think it's a
ranch, but it's called Zacatecas because it's the
same state. Yes. It's a city, Zacatecas, and it's
the state. And the state, I think they lived in a
ranch, I think. Yes, in Zacatecas.
And they didn't come because of the revolution? I
don't know. I don't think
so. I don't know the life of them
correctly. No. Do you know anyone who came here
because of the revolution?
No one says this is the reason for coming to
Texas. When I came here to live here, all those
people were already living here. And all those
people, the older ones, we came with the uncle from
Concire, a ranch that the uncle had. They called it
Rancho Grande. They told me that this is how the
ranch is called. It's called Kenere. Yes. That's
where the uncle came from. And that's where a lot of
men came to work here with him. Yes. They were
working with him in the ranch.
And those men were already here working for when I
came.
And it's for... a reason for a better life.
Some people that I know come to this country
because of the revolution. Yes, some because they
tell me that the soldiers come to their town and
make war in the town and things like that. And for
this reason they came here. Yes, they came here.
Yes. I've heard that when a bunch of soldiers came
to a village, they collected all the
food for them, for the soldiers. Food and corn for
the horses and all that. I think that's why many
came here. And I think that There were many places
where I think I've heard other older people talk.
Yes.
That many times they took people and put them in as
soldiers. Yes. I think for that reason many came
here.
And they who came for this reason, do they spend all
their lives here or did they return to Mexico after
the Revolution? Well, I think that when the
Revolution ended, I think that many of them
returned there and others stayed here, I think.
Yes. Many young people, I think, got married here
and I think they stayed here. Yes. The older ones
would come back, I think, again. Yes. The older
ones. Why the older ones? Well, let's see,
because... They would have their little house
there, little animals that they had in the ranch,
or something like that, right? Yes. That's why
they would come back, I think. And the younger
ones, well, I think they became... I think some of
them got married and stayed here.
It's partly a matter of heart. The older ones have
more heart in medicine. They have more head to go
back, thinking about what they left there. And the
young ones, well, No, no, no, no piensa mucho en
regresar por lo que dejaron allá los papás. Sí.
Mayormente si se casa aquí, bueno, ya disimula un
poco de lo que tienen allá, dejan allá.
Sí, yo creo es la verdad. Es indiferencia.
Y ellos que vienen, que estaban ricos, ¿están
diferentes de los pobres? ¿Qué piensa usted? ¿Los
ricos? Sí. ¿Qué son las diferencias entre los
ricos y los pobres aquí en los Estados Unidos?
Bueno,
pues el rico...
Well, I can't speak very bad of them either. No?
Because the rich have their money. And the poor,
well, they spend it with the little they earn.
Yes. That's the only difference here. And in
Mexico it's the same. In Mexico it's the same. It's
the same. It's the same. Well, thank you
very much for... Well, thank you very much, ma'am.
It's been a pleasure to meet you. Yes, the same to
you. I'm Cruz Sanchez. Yes.